---
title: "Solid Design Principles"
date: "2021-10-03"
lastmod: "2021-10-09"
author: "joergmis"
type: "zettel"
tldr: ""
tags:
- "@go"
- "@davecheney"
- "@patterns"
- "@softwareengineering"
- "@solid"
- "@talk"
toc: yes
---

*This is more or less a transcript of [this talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzAdEt3xZ1M)*

In [Agile Software Development](https://www.orellfuessli.ch/shop/home/artikeldetails/ID39816885.html)
Robert C. Martin wrote what traits reusable software has.

- single responsibility principle
- open / closed principle
- liskov substitution principle
- interface segregation principle
- dependency inversion principle

## Single responsibility principle

> A class should have one, and only one, reason to change.
> -- Robert C. Martin

Code that has only one reason to exist also has few reasons to change.

Coupling and cohesion describe how easy it is to change the code.

- coupling: movement in one induces a movement in another piece
- cohesion: property of pieces of code that are naturally attracted to each 
  other

For code, this starts with the packages. Packages embody the UNIX spirit: 
small, sharp tools which are combined to solve larger tasks.

## Open / closed principle

> Software entities should be open for extension, but closed for modification.
> -- bertrand Meyer

In go, you can make use of embedding to extend (but not alter) types.

```
package main

type Cat struct {}

func (c Cat) Legs() int { return 4 }

func (c Cat) GetLegs() int { return c.Legs() }

type OctoCat struct {
  Cat
}

func (c OctoCat) Legs() int { return 5 }

func main() {
  var octo OctoCat
  fmt.Println(octo.Legs())    // 5
  fmt.Println(octo.GetLegs()) // 4
}
```

*On a side note: methods are syntactic sugar around functions with a predefined
parameter; its receiver.*

## Liskov substitution principle (LSP)

The principle states that two types are substitutable if they roughly exhibit
the same behaviour so that the caller is unable to differentiate between them.

In go, there is no inheritance / classes but we have interfaces. They are
satisfied implicitly. Idiomatic interfaces are small and lead to simple 
implementations. This is neatly summarised by:

> Require no more, promise no less.
> -- Jim Weirich

## Interface segregation principle

> Clients should not be forced to depend on methods they do not use.
> -- Robert C. Martin

```
func Save(f *os.File, doc *Document) error
```

This has a few problems:

- does not allow to write to a network location
- operates directly with the file on disks -> not easy to test, cleaning up 
  necessary, ...
- `os.File` has many methods that are not necessary for the function `save`

```
func Save(rwc io.ReadWriteCloser, doc *Document) error
```

The author now is not longer able to rely on methods from `os.File`. The
function signature is limited to the necessary methods of the 
`io.ReadWriteCloser` interface.

To take it a step further, with the single responsibility principle it is 
highly unlikly that the method will read the file. 

```
func Save(wc io.WriteCloser, doc *Document) error
```

There is still some ambiguity - who is responsible for closing the writer? This
could be solved with documentation but it makes it hard to use the function
correctly.

```
func Save(w io.Writer, doc *Document) error
```

With the interface segregation principle, the method has become more concise 
and easier to understand.

> A great rule of thumb for Go is accept interfaces, return structs.
> -- Jack Lindamood

## Dependency inversion principle

> High-level modules should not depend on low-level modules. Both should depend
> on abstractions. Abstractions should not depend on details. Details
> should depend on abstractions.
> -- Robert C. Martin

In short, the principle encourages you to push the responsibility for specifics
as high as possible up in your import graph. This can be seen in the import 
graph; it should be wide and flat (or in the import statements of the source 
code).

## Recap

- single responsibility principle: structure functions and types into packages
  that exhibit natural cohesion
- open / close principle: compose complex types by embedding simple types
- liskov substitution principle: express dependencies in interfaces instead of
  concrete types
- interface substitution principle: use interfaces that exhibit only the
  behaviour that you need
- dependency inversion principle: refactor dependencies from compile to run
  time

> Design is the art of arranging code that needs to work today, and to be easy
> to change forever.
> -- Sandi Metz

## Sources

- [Golang UK 2016 - Dave Cheney - SOLID Go Design](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzAdEt3xZ1M)
